---
layout: post
title: Code-Completion in Sublime Text
subtitle: Apparently some of you use Sublime Text, so I asked a friend
  how to set up code-completion.
permalink: /sublime-clang/
---

This is a guest post from Alex Chojnacki ([thealex@umich.edu][alex]), who took
EECS 281 with me, and has worked extensively with a Sublime Text development
environment for 281.

  [alex]: mailto:thealex@umich.edu

We use SublimeClang to get compiler warnings and errors directly in Sublime
Text, even if we're compiling in CAEN. You'll want to use this in conjunction
with some method to edit remotely, such as [SSHFS][sshfs] or [SFTP][sftp].

  [sshfs]: {{ site.baseurl }}/dealing-with-caen/
  [sftp]: http://rdxiang.github.io/programming/sublime-sftp/

* toc
{:toc}

## Prerequisites

This guide is for Mac OS X users only.

Here's a workflow for those of us who love Sublime, but miss the code completion
elements of IDEs. The solution is a plugin and a short list of dependencies.

Things you will need (install in this order):

  * Sublime Text 2 (this will not work for Sublime Text 3):
    [http://www.sublimetext.com/2](http://www.sublimetext.com/2)

  * Package Control for Sublime Text 2 (everyone should get this if they use
    Sublime):
[https://packagecontrol.io/installation#st2](https://packagecontrol.io/installation#st2)

  * Homebrew: [http://brew.sh/](http://brew.sh/)

  * SublimeClang: In Package Control, search "SublimeClang" and select the
    package (it should be the only one named this --- if it is not, you may be
using Sublime Text 3).

## Installing GCC

To use SublimeClang, we'll need a custom version of the GNU Compiler Collection
(or "GCC") supporting C++11. (We'll use GCC 4.9.) First type `brew tap
homebrew/versions` into the terminal and hit enter. My output looked like this:

    ...

    theProfessional$ brew tap homebrew/versions
    Cloning into '/usr/local/Library/Taps/homebrew/homebrew-versions'...
    remote: Counting objects: 2693, done.
    remote: Total 2693 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
    Receiving objects: 100% (2693/2693), 884.52 KiB | 0 bytes/s, done.
    Resolving deltas: 100% (1562/1562), done.
    Checking connectivity... done.
    Tapped 171 formulae

    ...

Easy! The next thing you want to type is `brew install gcc49`. This will install
`gcc` 4.9.2 and a few of its dependencies. These aren't large files, but they do
take a while to download/install, so be prepared to keep your computer powered
and connected to the internet.

The following dependencies will install automatically:

`gmp4`
: 2.8 minutes

`mpfr2`
: 1 minute

`libmpc08`
: 30 seconds

`pkg-config`
: Half a second

`cloog018`
: 15 seconds.

Then, the main installation of `gcc49` will start.  This took my computer 31
minutes.

I list the times here just so you understand that it takes *some* time. Time
will vary based on internet connection and how zippy your computer is. Here was
the output at the end of the installation process:

    ...

    ==> Installing gcc49
    ==> Downloading http://ftpmirror.gnu.org/gcc/gcc-4.9.2/gcc-4.9.2.tar.bz2
    ######################################################################## 100.0%
    ==> Patching
    ==> ../configure --build=x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0 --prefix=/usr/local/Cellar/gc
    ==> make bootstrap
    ==> make install
    üç∫  /usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1: 1138 files, 164M, built in 31.4 minutes
    theProfessional$ []

    ...

## Configuring Sublime Text

We're almost finished! After the install is done, you'll want to try and compile
a C++ program using your new fancy GNU compiler. I recommend compiling a simple
"Hello World" on your desktop, but regardless of what you compile, make sure to
use the following command to do it:

    g++-4.9 helloWorld.cpp -v

The `-v` flag will provide verbose output, allowing us to see the paths to the
`gcc49` install's libraries. This is important because we need to tell
SublimeClang where to find these libraries! It will also produce a ton of other
output that is very scary.

Do not be alarmed by the wall of text! We will be looking for a few lines of
text --- specifically the ones between `#include <...> search starts here:` and
`End of search list.`

Mine looked like this:

    ...
    #include <...> search starts here:
    /usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/../../../../../../include/c++/4.9.2
    /usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/../../../../../../include/c++/4.9.2/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0
    /usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/../../../../../../include/c++/4.9.2/backward
    /usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/include
    /usr/local/include
    /usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/include
    /usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/include-fixed
    /usr/include
    /System/Library/Frameworks
    /Library/Frameworks
    End of include search.
    ...

Those are the paths we need to give to SublimeClang! So after you search through
the output in the terminal and nab these lines, you'll want to open up Sublime
Text 2 and navigate to the menu bar at the top. Next, click Sublime Text 2 ¬ª
Preferences ¬ª Package Settings ¬ª SublimeClang ¬ª Settings -- User.

After clicking, you'll be presented a blank file. This is part of what's known
as a JSON file, and it's what Sublime uses to keep track of settings. Here's
what you need to put in it in order for SublimeClang to compile your project
properly.

    {
        "options": [
            // Any flag you would normally add in your compile command can be added here as shown. Create an unused variable and uncomment ‚Äú-Wall‚Äù!
            // "-Wall",
            // "-Wno-unused-variable",

            // Change these!
            "-I/usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/../../../../../../include/c++/4.9.2",
            "-I/usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/../../../../../../include/c++/4.9.2/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0",
            "-I/usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/../../../../../../include/c++/4.9.2/backward",
            "-I/usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/include",
            "-I/usr/local/include",
            "-I/usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/include",
            "-I/usr/local/Cellar/gcc49/4.9.2_1/lib/gcc/4.9/gcc/x86_64-apple-darwin14.0.0/4.9.2/include-fixed",
            "-I/usr/include",
            "-I/System/Library/Frameworks",
            "-I/Library/Frameworks"
        ],

        "additional_language_options": {
            "c++": [
                "-std=c++11"
            ],
            "c": [],
            "objc": [],
            "objc++": []
        }
    }

You can see the dependencies revealed from earlier are now shown in quotes with
an `-I` and a comma separating each one. Obviously, these are just my file
paths. Yours could be different. The section at the bottom
`additional_language_options` can be copied directly from this article.

Save the settings file and close it.

We're done with all the installation! You should be able to open your
`helloWorld.cpp` from earlier and add something incorrect. Save the file
(<kbd>Cmd+s</kbd>) and watch the errors pop up in the console below! Taking the
semicolon off the end or using a vector without including `<vector>` should be
enough to throw an error.

{% image exampleError.png "Compile error showing in Sublime Text." %}

This means that you can open projects with Sublime Text 2 and have them link and
compile correctly --- allowing you access to autocompletion for the entire
standard library, as well as anything you have in other included files!
