---
layout: post
title: Dealing with CAEN
permalink: /interacting-with-caen/
---
This is a collection of tips for interacting with CAEN effectively via the
command line. It's not useful if you're using not using a command line to
connect to CAEN, or if you're using remote desktop services.

h1. Mounting CAEN as a local drive

You can use @sshfs@ to mount a CAEN directory as if it were a local drive. See "this post":https://piazza.com/class/hsxm0t6re5535m?cid=202 for more details.

h1. Stop typing @login.engin.umich.edu@ using by SSH aliases

You probably don't like typing the verbose <code>ssh wkhan@login.engin.umich.edu</code> all the time. Fortunately, @ssh@ has a built-in method for setting up _aliases_ for hosts. Edit the file @~/.ssh/config@ and add these lines (changing @wkhan@ to your uniqname):

bc. Host caen
  HostName login.engin.umich.edu
  User wkhan

This sets up a new alias so now you can type @ssh caen@ instead to log into CAEN.

h1. Transferring files to CAEN

You can use the @scp@ command (secure copy) to copy files to and from CAEN. <code>scp</code>'s syntax is the same as @cp@'s, except that either the source or destination should be on a remote host. For example, to copy @my-file.cpp@ to the @project-1@ directory CAEN, you could do this:

{% highlight sh %}
$ ls
my-file.cpp
$ scp my-file.cpp caen:project-1
{% endhighlight %}

<aside class="aside-tip">

The path specified after @:@ is relative to your home directory. If you wanted to copy a file to your home directory, you would just write @scp my-file.cpp caen:@.

</aside>

If you want to copy a whole directory, then you need to pass the @-r@ (recursive) flag, just like with @cp@. To copy @my-directory@ into your @project-1@ directory:

{% highlight sh %}
$ ls
my-directory/
$ scp -r my-directory caen:project-1
{% endhighlight %}

h1. Transferring files from CAEN

Just put the @scp@ in the reverse order to download from CAEN:

{% highlight sh %}
$ scp -r caen:project-1/my-directory my-directory
$ ls
my-directory/
{% endhighlight %}
